---
title: 4 s -> 13 ms
description: Test
pubDate: 'Apr 21 2024'
---

I recently had the urge to learn [Rust](https://rust-lang.org). However, as usual, I struggled to find a suitable basic project to start with. Eventually, I decided to remake [`nerdfetch`](https://github.com/ThatOneCalculator/NerdFetch) in Rust, but with a twist. I built it for Windows. As we will see later on, this proved to be quite problematic. However, that is also why it was a fun thing to work on.

Building out the basic utility was fairly easy. Actually, let me rephrase that. Building out the basic utility was fairly easy *using a lot of crates*. But that was just the system metadata. Fetching the package count was a whole another story. Obviously, there were no crates to do this, so I had to do this manually. In the first release, I fetched the package count by running the `list` commands and counting the lines in their output. However, this proved to unbearably slow, and resulted in execution times of above 4s. This tool was written in Rust and had a execution time of 4s! I myself laughed at this.

I was determined to bring it down to ~10ms, I knew Rust was capable of that. Or well, at least I could try. And, so I got to work. First and foremost, was getting rid of executing commands in the package CLIs. This was not particularly easy, as it meant manipulating a bunch of paths and directories and environment variables. This took me a lot of time, effort, and research.

### Figuring out `scoop`
In `v1` I was executing `scoop list` and counting the number of lines in the output barring the header lines. This was however, extremely slow because of two reasons. Firstly, I had to execute the commands through `cmd /c` because of Windows shell limitations. Secondly, `scoop` itself is very slow. To get rid of this command execution, I had to find a way to do directly the way `scoop` does. Although, I originally planned on going through the `scoop` source, by a turn of events, I discord the path at which scoop itself is located. Running `which scoop` tells me this path is `C:\Users\[username]\scoop\shims\scoop.ps1`. However more digging showed that it is possible to install scoop in locations other than `C:\Users\[username]\scoop`, so I could not hardcode this path into the code. Instead, I used a crate ` which` and located the scoop binary, and then proceeded to get the parent directory from there. Then, it was just a matter of counting the files in the directory. This reduced the execution time by a significant amount to around 2 seconds.

This was however, still quite slow, and noticeable.

### Figuring out Chocolatey
Just like `scoop`, originally, the `choco list` command, which was also slow and had to be executed via `cmd /c`. Replacing this command, was comparatively easy since from their documentation it seems that chocolatey always stores this data in `%PROGRAMDATA%\chocolatey`. This could be hardcoded however, I would have to resolve the `PROGRAMDATA` environment variable as it could be(although highly unlikely) different on different machines.

And, with this check, and change, I saw an average execution speed of ~50ms. I was content for the moment but not for long. Soon after publishing the `v1.1.0` release, I again got to work, to speed it up even more.

### Finetuning and speeding up even further
I achieved average speed of 50ms by getting rid of the two of the slowest pieces of code. Speeding it up now, was rather more tricky since there were no slow parts. I thought that perhaps getting rid of as many dependencies as I could. This proved to more difficult than I had imagined. Most of the crates I had been using, under the hood were using the `windows` or `winapi`(Windows SDK for Rust) crate to directly communicate with Windows internals. Having never worked with the Windows SDK in my life, I decided to go to good old Google and StackOverflow. After a ton of searching, and researching, I decided to use the `winapi` crate instead of the `windows` since it seemed simpler.

However before rewriting the core utilities using the `winapi` crate I decided to get rid of the `colored` crate. This was as easy as anything. I simply replaced the `"string".color()` functions with ANSI escape codes and there was no problem whatsoever.

Few things were easy with the Windows SDK even. Like getting the system uptime. The only code I had to change was from `uptime_lib::get().unwrap().as_secs()` to `GetTickCount64() / 1000`. `GetTickCount` here is a windows SDK function from `winapi::um::sysinfoapi`, and we divide it by 1000(`/ 1000`) because the value returned is in milliseconds.

In the earlier releases, I had been using the `sysinfo` crate to get the total and used memory information. However this was one of the more "minute" very slow parts, since the crate is not just about `memory`. It lets you get all types system info, and you have to manually refresh that data, probably making it slower(it is still very fast, just not as fast as I want it). Rewriting the memory logic using the Windows SDK was also not too *different* or complex.

It might sound odd but the complex ones were actually the username and device or hostnames. I had to scour through a lot of source code and Google to get them just right. However, it also made the device name a little more accurate. The username and hostname were retrieved in the exact same way, so I could easily just reuse the same code, but figuring out either one was a hell of a job.

#### Username and Hostnames
Originally I thought this would be an easy task, as I found `GetUserNameW` and `GetComputerNameW` in the Windows SDK, but that was hardly it. The actual process to get the username is rather a lot different.

Here's the complete code:
```rust title="src/main.rs"  showLineNumbers{56}
// Username
let mut username_size = 0;
unsafe { GetUserNameW(null_mut(), &mut username_size) };
let mut username_buf = Vec::with_capacity(username_size.try_into().unwrap_or(MAX));
unsafe {
	GetUserNameW(username_buf.as_mut_ptr(), &mut username_size);
	username_buf.set_len(username_size.try_into().unwrap_or(MAX));
}
let username = OsString::from_wide(&username_buf)
	.into_string()
	.unwrap_or(String::from("Unknown"));
```

This snippet might look weird provided it is just to fetch the username. Like why are we calling the function twice? Why are we using `OsString`? What the hell is `null_mut()`

Well, Windows was originally written in C/C++, and well still is. That means the underlying functions which this Rust counterpart calls are after all to that underlying API. C/C++ has to be completely typesafe and avoid memory leaks, and such. Hence, it uses pointers and a bunch of other "low-level" methods to be perfectly fast and secure. But as good as that is, it meant more work for me.

Basically, with this API, I had to first blank buffer for the actual username and a mutable integer to fetch the username length. Using this length, we have to create a buffer(with that length) and finally call the method again but this time with the buffer we created to store the result in. This is still not enough to be displayed on the screen however. The result has to be converted into an `OsString` and from that into a general rust `String` to be displayed. This pretty much same code has to be repeated to fetch the computer's hostname.

And finally, after all these tiny but effective tweaks and tuning, I ran the executable. I saw it. A speed of 13ms. 13ms! I was happy. For now at least. And now, even with the time it takes to discover the executable on the `PATH`, the average runtime speed is 22ms. It's hard to tell the difference between such minute speeds by looking at it really, but on paper, it is a lot.

### Things I am still unhappy about
Well for starters, I still have to use a crate to get the Windows version. It sounds crazy probably but yeah, getting the version is much difficult than it seems. I can *probably* do it myself probably but it will have to wait for another release. The process is a little unconventional too, like the crate seems to be getting the version from some file present in the core windows kernel.

I also feel like I can make the package counting faster and better, so I will try my luck there, but I am doubtful of how much success I can get really. But that's it for this time, be back for the next one!